Blog post - Equity Explainer (#4362)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/equity_explainer.md

## How PostHog does things differently

|                           | **PostHog**                 | **Most startups**           |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|
| **Vesting Start:**        | On your first day           | After a "probationary period"|
| **Exercise Window:**      | 10 _years_ after departure  | 90 _days_ after departure    |
| **Merger or Acquisition** | Double-Trigger acceleration | No acceleration              |
| **Good Leavers**.         | Includes performance lay-off| Doesn't include performance  |

### Vesting Start

At PostHog, we recognize that you start contributing to the company on day one, so we feel that you should start earning your options on that day as well. Many others make you wait until after a probationary period, often three months, before your options start to vest.

### Exercise Window

> Regardless of whether you resign, or are let go for performance reasons, you will have 10 years from the day you were hired to exercise your options. In most companies, you have only three months to exercise your options before you lose them entirely, which can make tax optimization and planning a stressful and difficult process. We also believe that this window allows you the opportunity to watch the company's growth before deciding to exercise your options. One thing to note is that based on IRS law, tax advantaged ISOs convert into NSOs after 3 months, so there may still be an incentive to exercise sooner.

Reviewer: This may be more obvious to Us folks, but I have no idea what ISOs and NSOs are. Do they need explaining somewhere?

> # The Benefits of Exercis(ing your Options)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# A complete and simple guide to options at PostHog
```

I think the current title isn't great - the benefits of exercising = making money. This guide is much more extensive

Suppose you’ve ever worked for a start-up, or read news about a Unicorn tech company turning people into multi-millionaires overnight. In that case, chances are you have heard of the concept of equity.

> Equity is the amount of ownership of a corporation held by a person or entity. This ownership is usually described as either a percentage of the total equity of the business or at later stages, a finite number of shares. The vast majority of tech start-ups offer equity as part of a total compensation package, normally in the form of share “options”, and the upside potential of these options is meant to compensate for the more grueling (and in my opinion, rewarding) work of growing a start-up company from founding to IPO (more on that later).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Equity is the amount of ownership of a corporation held by a person or entity. This ownership is usually described as either a percentage of the total equity of the business or at later stages, a finite number of shares. The majority of tech start-ups offer equity as part of their total compensation, normally in the form of share “options”. The upside potential of these options is meant to compensate for the more gruelling (and in my opinion, rewarding) work of growing a start-up company from founding to IPO (more on that later).
```

> As ubiquitous as equity is in the start-up world, it is probably the most widely misunderstood element of joining a technology company. With this post, I hope to shine a light on some of the most confusing aspects of start-up equity, and highlight how PostHog breaks from the norm to offer options in a much more employee-friendly way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite its popularity, equity is probably the most widely misunderstood element of joining a startup. With this post, I hope to shine a light on some of the most confusing aspects of start-up equity, and highlight how PostHog breaks from the norm to offer options in a much more employee-friendly way.
```

The most common vesting schedule for tech companies these days is the 4-year/1-year cliff, which means that a quarter of your options vest after your 1-year work anniversary, and 1/36th of your remaining options vest each month for the following three years. As a company, we feel that this structure strikes a fair balance between incentivizing team members to stay and contribute to the growth of the company, while not locking them into “golden handcuffs” where they are required to put in 4 years of work to reap any of the benefits of being a part of a start-up.

### But how exactly do share options turn you into a millionaire? 

> When you are granted your options on the first day of employment, the price you will pay to exercise them will stay static at whatever the Fair Market Value (FMV) per share is on your first day, irrespective of what the value is when you sell your purchased shares. The FMV is decided through an external, very complicated process known as a 409A, and the initial sale price of the share is usually set when the company “goes public” or “IPOs” by being listed on a public stock exchange like the NYSE. This is known as a “liquidation event” and in the simplest terms, the difference between your exercise price and the price of the share you sell in the public market is cash in your pocket. The reality of this is much more complicated, as there can be a number of [tax implications](https://secfi.com/learn/exercise-stock-options-tax-implications) depending on the type of option you were granted, when you decide to exercise them relative to when you sell them, and your overall income; but you really should talk to an accountant before making any serious decisions so you don’t end up with an unexpectedly massive tax bill.

Reviewer 2: + we should mention EMI for the UK since it's 30% ish of our team

Making matters more complicated, the majority of standard terms in stock option plans limit your freedom in when and how you can exercise your options. 

### At PostHog, we try to do things differently:

|                           | **PostHog**                 | **The Other Guys**           |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|

> | **Vesting Start:**        | On your first day           | After a "probationary period |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Vesting Start:**        | On your first day           | After a "probationary period" |
```

| **Exercise Window:**      | 10 _years_ after departure  | 90 _days_ after departure    |
| **Merger or Acquisition** | Double-Trigger acceleration | No acceleration              |

> ### Vesting Start:

Reviewer 2: we should be upfront about the cliff too (we're the same as everyone else here), but it is worth making sure we're clear about it

At PostHog, we recognize that you start contributing to the growth of our company on day 1 (and even before that, on your SuperDay), so we feel that you should start earning your options on that day as well (because our lawyers won’t let us give you options until you’re actually hired). Many other start-up companies make you wait until after a probationary period, often 3-months, before your options start to vest.

### Exercise Window:

> 

Author: Hmm, neither of my previous two companies has equity plans that made you forfeit your stock options if you voluntarily left, only if you were terminated with cause.

> 

Author: @jamesefhawkins curious to hear your thoughts before I finish edits and merge

In the unlikely event that you are let go “with cause” (AKA gross misconduct like embezzlement or discrimination), you will forfeit your options, which we feel is only fair.

### Merger or Acquisition:

In the event that PostHog is sold to another company before we reach an IPO, we have preferable terms that ensure team members who contributed to growing the company to that point are rewarded for their efforts. If the company is acquired (first trigger) AND you are terminated as part of that acquisition (second trigger), all of your options vest immediately and your 10-year window to exercise them begins. This can offer some protection and certainty to employees who exercise their options following this trigger, as shares in the company during acquisition are much more tangible than options to buy shares, and are often converted into shares of the acquiring company or bought back by the acquirer for cash.

> As a fully open-source company, we try to be as transparent as possible about compensation including equity, because we firmly believe that everyone who contributes to our success should reap the benefits. For more information about how PostHog thinks about equity, check out our compensation page and equity FAQ in our handbook.

Reviewer 2: add relevant links here

> As a fully open-source company, we try to be as transparent as possible about compensation including equity, because we firmly believe that everyone who contributes to our success should reap the benefits. For more information about how PostHog thinks about equity, check out our compensation page and equity FAQ in our handbook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an open-source company, we are transparent about compensation including equity, because we believe that everyone who contributes to our success should reap the benefits. For more information about how PostHog thinks about equity, check out our compensation page and equity FAQ in our handbook.
```

---
date: 2022-10-20

> title: "A complete and simple guide to options at PostHog"

Reviewer: I'd like to come with a more opinionated headline for this.

Reviewer 3: Could go the transparency route - 'Building the most transparent share options scheme ever'

Reviewer: The second one is getting warmer for sure. Is transparent the right word, though?

Reviewer 3: I guess the transparency is around sharing these terms (10 year etc.) that usually remain a mystery until you actually join the company. However on reflection we're not as transparent as we could be because we don't specify the share options each role gets (yet, at least). 

What about 'Read the small print: how we built the most employee-friendly share options scheme possible'

Or 'Why we believe share option terms matter just as much as how many you get'

(This is really hard to articulate in a way that isn't a 50 word title!)

hideAnchor: true
categories: ["Inside PostHog", "Startups", "Guides"]
author: ["grace-mckenzie"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-ceo-diary-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
---

Suppose you’ve ever worked for a start-up, or read news about a Unicorn tech company turning people into multi-millionaires overnight. In that case, chances are you have heard of the concept of equity.

Equity is the amount of ownership of a corporation held by a person or entity. This ownership is usually described as either a percentage of the total equity of the business or at later stages, a finite number of shares. The majority of tech start-ups offer equity as part of their total compensation, normally in the form of share “options”. The upside potential of these options is meant to compensate for the more gruelling (and in my opinion, rewarding) work of growing a start-up company from founding to IPO (more on that later).

But, despite its popularity, equity is very rarely understood by employees! With this post, I hope to shine a light on some of the most confusing aspects of start-up equity, and highlight how PostHog breaks from the norm to offer options in a much more employee-friendly way.

> ## Startup shares and the options pool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How share options work
```

It's an option to purchase a share of the company at a given price – the “strike price” – which is known as “exercising” the option, thus becoming a percent owner of the company. However, these options are almost always granted by way of what is known as a vesting schedule, where options become available for exercise progressively over the course of employment with the company. This is to prevent a new hire from joining a company, exercising all of their options immediately, quitting, and watching their shares in the company grow in value without contributing any work towards building the company. 

The most common vesting schedule for tech companies these days is the 4-year/1-year cliff, which means that a quarter of your options vest after your 1-year work anniversary, and 1/36th of your remaining options vest each month for the following three years. As a company, we feel that this structure strikes a fair balance between incentivizing team members to stay and contribute to the growth of the company, while not locking them into “golden handcuffs” where they are required to put in 4 years of work to reap any of the benefits of being a part of a start-up.

> ### How exactly do share options turn you into a millionaire? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How do share options turn you into a millionaire? 
```

The FMV is decided through an external, very complicated process known as a 409A, and the initial sale price of the share is usually set when the company "goes public" or "IPOs" by being listed on a public stock exchange like the NYSE. This is known as a “liquidation event” and in the simplest terms, the difference between your exercise price and the price of the share you sell in the public market is cash in your pocket. 

The reality of this is much more complicated, as there can be a number of [tax implications](https://secfi.com/learn/exercise-stock-options-tax-implications) depending on the type of option you were granted, when you decide to exercise them relative to when you sell them, and your overall income; but you really should talk to an accountant before making any serious decisions so you don’t end up with an unexpectedly massive tax bill.

Making matters more complicated, the majority of standard terms in stock option plans limit your freedom in when and how you can exercise your options. 

> ## How PostHog does things differently

Reviewer: It would be nice to start this section with a little more commentary on, philosophically, why we wanted to do things differently, before we get into practicalities of how we're different.

Reviewer 3: (Jumping in as @jamesefhawkins @timgl and I implemented these terms before Grace joined)

There are a few justifications here:
- We had personally been burned by lame share option schemes when working at previous companies, so wanted to build something we wish we'd had. 
- It helps us to attract talent by making our share options massively more valuable in practical terms, not just the pure $ amount (which in many ways may be the least important thing). 
- It's part of our culture to expect high performance but reward people well and ensure they are genuinely able to share in PostHog's growth. Having a good share options scheme helps people feel more bought in. 
- (Lame but true) It's the right thing to do, dammit.

---
date: 2022-10-20
title: "Rising tides: our employee-friendly share options scheme"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
categories: ["Inside PostHog", "Startups", "Guides"]
author: ["grace-mckenzie"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-ceo-diary-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
---

If you’ve ever worked for a startup, or read about a Unicorn tech company turning employees into multi-millionaires overnight, chances are you've heard of equity.

Equity is the amount of ownership of a corporation held by a person or entity. This ownership is usually described as either a percentage of the total equity of the business or, at later stages, a finite number of shares. 

> The majority of tech start-ups offer equity as part of their total compensation, normally in the form of share “options”. The upside potential of these options is meant to compensate for the more gruelling (and in my opinion, rewarding) work of growing a start-up company from founding to IPO (more on that later).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The majority of tech startups offer equity as part of their total compensation, normally in the form of share “options”. The upside potential of these options is meant to compensate for the more gruelling (and in my opinion, rewarding) work of growing a start-up company from founding to IPO (more on that later).
```

When we set out to design a share options scheme for PostHog, we decided to prioritize employee-friendliness for a number of reasons:

1. Many of us had personally been burned by unfriendly share option schemes when working at previous companies.

2. It helps us to attract talent by making our share options massively more valuable in practical terms, not just the pure $ amount (which in many ways may be the least important thing).

3. It's part of our culture to expect high performance but reward people well and ensure they are genuinely able to share in PostHog's growth. Having a good share options scheme helps people feel more bought in.

4. We also feel that it's just the right thing to do!

## How share options work

When a startup company is incorporated, the founders decide on how to divide ownership between them by (quite literally) choosing a random number of shares to create out of thin air and distributing them to each other in some proportion. 

> In the common two-founder model, most start-ups distribute the shares as a 50/50 split between them, accounting for 100% ownership of the business. The shares are "purchased" for a nominal cost like a ten-thousandth of a cent because the value of a newly minted start-up company is effectively nothing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the common two-founder model, most startups distribute the shares as a 50/50 split between them, accounting for 100% ownership of the business. The shares are "purchased" for a nominal cost like a ten-thousandth of a cent because the value of a newly minted start-up company is effectively nothing.
```

As our hypothetical founders pull Red-Bull-fueled all-nighters building their MVP and applying to accelerator programs, the valuation of their company slowly increases until the point where they seek outside investors to inject capital into the business to expedite growth. 

In exchange for that investment, the founders must give investors ownership in the business. But, rather than giving away their own shares, they authorize a new number of shares to be created and exchanged for real dollars. In doing so, they “dilute” their ownership by increasing the size of the total equity pie, without growing their own number of shares. 

This process of dilution will continue with every new fundraising round, impacting the value of a given person’s equity as well as the founders’ authority over the business relative to their investors.

Usually, the first fundraising round (the ‘seed’ round) will involve carving out a chunk of the newly generated shares to create an ‘options pool’, which can be dipped into to provide options to newly hired employees as the company grows in size. 

### What exactly is an option? 

> It's an option to purchase a share of the company at a given price – the “strike price” – which is known as “exercising” the option, thus becoming a percent owner of the company. These options are almost always granted by way of what is known as a vesting schedule, where options become available for exercise progressively over the course of employment with the company. This is to prevent a new hire from joining a company, exercising all of their options immediately, quitting, and watching their shares in the company grow in value without contributing any work towards building the company. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's an option to purchase a share of the company at a given price – the “strike price” – which is known as “exercising” the option, thus becoming a percent owner of the company. 

Options are almost always granted by way of what is known as a vesting schedule, where options become available for exercise progressively over the course of employment with the company. This is to prevent a new hire from joining a company, exercising all of their options immediately, quitting, and watching their shares in the company grow in value without contributing any work towards building the company. 
```
